--- PAGE 1 ---
5572 IEEETRANSACTIONSONVEHICULARTECHNOLOGY,VOL.73,NO.4,APRIL2024
Online Positioning of a Drone-Mounted Base
Station in Emergency Scenarios
T.R.Pijnappel ,J.L.vandenBerg ,S.C.Borst ,andR.Litjens
Abstract—Wirelesscommunicationnetworksprovideacritical relief and/or restore coverage. Also in case of events with
infrastructure,particularlyinemergencysituationsduetodisrup- massivecrowds/traffichotspotssuchassportsgames,festivalsor
tiveeventssuchasnaturaldisastersorterroristattacks.However,in
large-scaledemonstrations,anetworkmayfacecapacityissues
thesekindsofscenariospartofthenetworkmaynolongerbeoper-
and can therefore benefit from the deployment of drone base
ationalandatraffichotspotmayemerge,whichmayresultincover-
ageand/orcapacityissues.Deployingself-steeringdrone-mounted stations[1].
basestationsoffersapotentialmethodtoquicklyrestorecoverage The effective deployment of a drone base station crucially
and/orprovidecapacityreliefinsuchsituations,butappropriate relies on determining an appropriate 3D-position. A well-
positioningiscrucialinorderforadronebasestationtobetruly
positioned drone can significantly improve performance as it
effective. Motivated by that challenge, we propose a data-driven
is able to support users that otherwise would be unserved.
algorithm to optimize the position of a drone base station in a
scenariowithasitefailureandemergenceofatraffichotspot.We Furthermore, served users may experience a stronger signal
demonstrate that the use of a drone, when properly positioned, and experience less interference when served by the drone.
yieldssignificantperformancegains,andthatouralgorithmout- On the other hand, a poorly positioned drone can potentially
performsbenchmarkmechanismsinawiderangeofscenarios.In
even degrade network performance as it may cause additional
addition,weshowthatouralgorithmisabletofindanear-optimal
interference for users that are not connected to the drone. It
positionforthedroneinareasonableamountoftime,andevenhas
theabilitytotracktheoptimalpositionincaseofamovinghotspot. canalsobethecasethatthedroneunintentionallyattractsusers
that are better off when served by one of the still operational
Index Terms—5G, drone base stations, drone base station
regularbasestationsandenjoyingthebenefitsofe.g.theirhigher
positioning,data-drivenalgorithm,dynamictraffichotspot.
transmitpowerorenhancedbeamformingcapabilities.
The drone positioning problem is particularly challenging,
I. INTRODUCTION sincetheoptimalpositiondependsonmanyaspects,including
THE key requirements in the planning and optimization thenatureofthescenario(crowdedeventornetworkdisruption),
andthegenerallyunknownpropagationcharacteristicsandspa-
of wireless cellular networks include the provisioning of
tialuserdistribution.Moreover,incaseofanetworkdisruption
adequatecoverageandsufficienttraffichandlingcapacity.While
involving both a site failure and the emergence of a traffic
well-engineered networks meet these requirements in normal
hotspot,optimizingthedronepositionmayinvolveachallenging
conditions, they may not be able to do so in situations where
trade-offbetweenbringingcapacitytothetraffichotspotoralle-
partofthenetworkisnolongeroperational.Suchsituationsmay
viatingacoverageholeinducedbythesitefailure.Thistrade-off
forexampleariseduetonaturaldisasterssuchasearthquakes,
dependsonthelocationandintensityofthehotspot,whichare
floodings,orwildfires,orduetoterroristattacks.Inthesecases,
oftennotaprioriknowninpractice.Inthispaperwedevelopan
itmaybedifficult,dangerousand/ortime-consumingforarepair
onlinecontrolalgorithmwhichaddressesthistrade-offanduses
or maintenance team to access the affected area and restore
real-timeandpracticallymeasurabledatatofindanappropriate
the network operations. Especially in these kinds of situations
position for a drone base station. For this we investigate the
the deployment of self-steering drone-mounted base stations
performanceimpactofdifferentcontrolparameterssuchasthe
offers a flexible and promising method to provide capacity
drone’s3D-positionanddevelopadronepositioningalgorithm
basedonthemostimportantcontrolparameters.
Manuscript received 22 February 2023; revised 7 August 2023; accepted
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
11 September 2023. Date of publication 3 November 2023; date of current
version22April2024.ThisworkwassupportedbytheNetherlandsOrgani- SectionII-Aprovidesareviewofrelatedliteratureandhighlights
sationforScientificResearch(NWO)throughGravitation-GrantunderGrant the contribution of this work. In Section III the overall setting
NETWORKS-024.002.003.ThereviewofthisarticlewascoordinatedbyProf.
and the key performance metric that we consider throughout
ZhiguoShi.(Correspondingauthor:T.R.Pijnappel.)
T.R. Pijnappel and S.C. Borst are with Eindhoven University of Tech- thepaperareintroduced.SectionIVelaboratesonthetrade-offs
nology, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail: t.r.pijnappel@tue.nl; andchallengesindetermininganappropriatepositionofadrone
s.c.borst@tue.nl).
basestation.InSectionVwepresentthemodelingassumptions
J.L.vandenBergiswiththeUniversityofTwente,7522NBEnschede,The
Netherlands(e-mail:j.l.vandenberg@utwente.nl). underlyingtheconductedsimulations,andsubsequentlydiscuss
R.LitjensiswithTNO,2595DATheHague,TheNetherlands,andalsowith the results of a simulation-based sensitivity analysis involving
DelftUniversityofTechnology,2628CDDelft,TheNetherlands(e-mail:remco.
a static drone in Section VI. The proposed data-driven drone
litjens@tno.nl).
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/TVT.2023.3329960 positioning algorithm is specified in Section VII, followed by
©2023TheAuthors.ThisworkislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives4.0License.Formoreinformation,see
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
--- PAGE 2 ---
PIJNAPPELetal.:ONLINEPOSITIONINGOFADRONE-MOUNTEDBASESTATIONINEMERGENCYSCENARIOS 5573
theresultsofasimulationstudyinSectionVIIItoexaminethe transmitpowersforthedrones.[12]aimstomaximizecoverage
performance of the algorithm. Section IX summarizes the key in an emergency scenario by deploying a temporary network
conclusionsandprovidessometopicsforfurtherresearch. whichconsistsofatruckbasestationandmultipledronebase
stations.AknowndrawbackoftheusedQ-learningapproachis
II. RELATEDLITERATUREANDCONTRIBUTION thatitrequiresarelativelylongtimetolearntheenvironment,
whileinemergencyscenariositisofutmostimportancethatthe
This section provides an overview of related literature and
systemisquicklyabletofindtheoptimalpositionsandtherefore
highlightsthecontributionofthiswork.
doesnotrequirealonglearningperiod.
Theauthorsof[13]considertheoptimizationoftheposition
A. RelatedLiterature
ofadronebasestationinanonlinesettingwithusermobility.
Although drone base stations can be used in many situa- Forthisoptimizationtheauthorsaimtominimizethepathlossof
tions[2],wefocusourliteraturereviewonpapersthatconsider theuserwiththehighestpathlossusingaQ-learningapproach,
theirdeploymentforenhancingcoverageandcapacityinscenar- agradient-basedsolutionandagreedyalgorithm.
ioswithcrowdedeventsandpublicsafetysettings.Forthisuse In[14]alayeredarchitectureisproposedwheredronesflying
casemostpapersaimtooptimizethepositioningofdrones[3], inswarmsatdifferentaltitudesareconsideredasanintegrated
[4],[5],[6],[7],[8],[9],[10],[11],[12],[13],[14],[15],[16], part of future cellular networks to provide additional capacity
[17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22] while some also optimize the andexpandcoverage.Inthiswork,thepositioningofthedrones
numberofdronesthatneedtobedeployed[3],[4],[5],[6]. at the lowest layer (the drones serving the users) is optimized
In[3],theauthorsconsideranentirelydrone-based3Dcellular usinganexhaustivesearch,whichisnotedtobedifficultinmore
networkprovidingwirelesscoveragetodrone-baseduserequip- complexscenarios.
ments(UEs).Tothisendtheauthorsapproximatedrone-specific Alsotheuseofdronesasrelaystationsisinvestigatedby[15],
coverageareasbytruncatedoctahedronshapestodeterminethe [16],[17].In[15]theauthorsaimtomaximizethroughputwhile
requirednumberofdronebasestationsandtheirpositions. takingintoaccountthequalityofserviceoftheusers,capacity
In [4] a classical branch-and-bound algorithm with a of the backhaul, available bandwidth and available power. For
relaxation-induced neighborhood search is compared with a thispurposetheproblemisdecomposedintoa3D-positioning
low-complexityheuristicintheoptimizationofthenumberand problem and a resource allocation problem which are solved
locationofdronebasestations.Thecomparisonshowsthatthe using a cyclic iterative algorithm. Similarly, [16] designs a
heuristictendstoconnectmoreusers,butrequiresmoredrones heuristicalgorithmthatjointlyoptimizestheplacementofdrone
todoso. relays,userassociationandbandwidthallocationsuchthatthe
The study in [5] compares a simulated annealing approach numberofservedusersinadisasterstruckareaismaximized.
andageneticalgorithmtominimizethenumberofdronebase In [17] it is noted that both power allocation and positioning
stationsandoptimizetheir3D-positionsforenergy-efficientcov- of the drones affect system performance. For this reason they
erageprovisioning.Anotherapproachproposedby[6]and[7] developcriteriaforoptimalpositioningandpowerallocationof
istouseaparticleswarmoptimizationalgorithmtofindsuitable thedronerelays.
3D-positionsfordronecells.Theproposedalgorithmstartswith As drones carry a battery they can only be deployed for a
asetofcandidatesolutionsandtriestoiterativelyimprovethese limitedamountoftime.Toovercomethisissue,[18]proposesto
solutionswithrespecttoagivenmeasurerelatedtothecapacity, providepowertothedroneusingatetherthatconnectsthedrone
coverageandspectralefficiency. to the ground. For this setting, the authors study the optimal
Software-definednetworksofferamethodthatfacilitatesthe placement of such a drone within a so-called hovering region
executionofthealgorithmandmeasurements,andistherefore thatdependsonthetetherlengthandsurroundingbuildings.
suitablefortheimplementationofadronepositioningalgorithm. In [19] a sensitivity analysis regarding the position and cell
E.g.[8]proposesasoftware-definednetworkingbasedapproach selection bias is conducted. This analysis showed that in the
to construct a more resilient network, where particle swarm given setting the CSR is not very sensitive to the position and
optimizationisusedforthepositioningofdrones. cellselectionbiaswhentheseareclosetooptimal.
In [9] a ‘sweep and search’ procedure is proposed to find In[20]theauthorspresentananalyticalapproachtooptimize
optimallocationsfordronebasestationswiththegoaltoprovide the altitude of drone base stations to provide maximum radio
coveragetoasmanyusersaspossibleforagivenconstellationof coverageontheground.
users.Tofindtheoptimalpositionsforthedrones,eachdroneis The authors of [21] propose to use a machine learning ap-
assignedasearcharea,whereitsearchesforuserclusterswhile proach to detect overloaded cells and formulate an optimiza-
followingazig-zagpattern. tion problem for the deployment of drone base stations. This
In [10], [11], [12] the authors use Q-learning to find the optimizationproblemaimstomaximizethenumberofcovered
optimal placement of drone base stations. [10] considers the usersinoverloadedcellsbyfindingtheoptimal3D-placementof
useofasingledronebasestationincombinationwithexisting droneswhileminimizingtheenergyconsumptionofthedrones.
regular base stations with the goal to maximize the aggregate Asallreviewedpapersconsiderdifferentapproaches,incor-
network throughput. In [11] the use of multiple drone base porateothersystemaspectsand/orpursuedifferentobjectives,
stationsisconsideredinascenariowithoutregularbasestations. wehighlightthenoveltyofourworkinTableIwhereweindicate
In this setting the authors aim to find optimal positions and whetherafewkeyaspectsrelatingtotheaddressedscenarioor
--- PAGE 3 ---
5574 IEEETRANSACTIONSONVEHICULARTECHNOLOGY,VOL.73,NO.4,APRIL2024
TABLEI naturallyadaptstothechangingenvironment.Furthermore,[4],
NOVELASPECTSOFCURRENTPAPERINRELATIONTOCLOSESTPRIORWORK
[5],[6],[9],[11]onlyconsidertheuseofdronebasestations.In
this paper we will also take still operational regular sites into
account. For the described setting we initially consider four
control parameters (the x, y, z coordinates and a cell selection
biasknownastheCellIndividualOffsetorCIO),andshowusing
asimulation-basedsensitivityanalysisthatthealtitudeandCIO
havelimitedimpactonthechosenperformancemetric,theCall
SuccessRate(CSR).
Becauseofthisobservation,theproposedalgorithmwillonly
adjustthexandycoordinatesofthedrone.Asitisnotpossible
to accurately measure the CSR in short periods of time, we
the pursued solution are covered by the most closely related
identifypracticallymeasurablemetricstodrivetheadjustments
references. Firstly, we indicate whether the studies consider
ofthexandycoordinates.However,itisnotclearwhatthemost
mixed scenarios involving both terrestrial base stations and
appropriatemetricistodrivetheseadjustments.Astheselection
dronebasestationsorconsidertheuseofdronesonly.Secondly,
ofsuchametricisofgreatimportanceforourproposedmethod
we specify whether the exploited measurements are or can be
weinvestigateseveralmetricsandcomparetheirperformance.
realisticallymadeavailableinanoperationalsetting,notingthat
Theadvantageofthisapproachisthatitonlyreliesonpractically
anetworkisgenerallyunawareofthefractionofusersthathave
measurable metrics and does not require any pre-deployment
no coverage. In the final row we indicate whether the study
learningorknowledgeofthepropagationenvironment,antenna
optimizes drone positions (configurations) in a scenario with
features, location of the hotspot or traffic density. As a result,
arealisticvariationinthepresenceand/orlocationofusers,or
theproposedalgorithmcanbeoperationallydeployedinawide
assumesauserconstellationwhichremainsconstantthroughout
rangeofscenarios.
(partsof)theoptimizationprocess.
For the performance assessment of the algorithm we will
Althoughthesolutionsproposedby[4],[5],[6],[7],[8],[9],
examineawiderangeofcoverageandcapacity-limitedscenarios
[10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16] seem reasonable, these
which correspond to both urban and rural environments. For
solutions require the ability to evaluate the performance for
these environments we consider various locations and traffic
all possible configurations of the drone locations at a given
intensitiesofthehotspot.Moreover,wecompareouralgorithm
time.Inordertodoso,thesepaperseffectivelyassumethatthe
with relevant benchmarks: i) no drone assistance; ii) a static
constellationofactiveusersdoesnotchangewhilethealgorithm
drone deployed right above the failing site; iii) the algorithm
searchesfortheoptimalposition.However,thisassumptionhas
proposedin[22].Weshowthatcomparedtothesebenchmarks
practicallimitationsindynamicsettingsasboththemovement
our algorithm has a similar or improved performance in all
of a drone from one location to another as well as measuring
scenarios.Lastly,wedemonstratethatouralgorithmisableto
theperformanceatagivenlocationtakestime,duringwhichthe
findanear-optimalpositioninafairlyshortamountoftime,and
constellation of active users is likely to change. To overcome
eveniscapabletotracktheoptimalpositionincaseofamoving
thisissue,thealgorithmthatweproposewillnaturallyadaptto
traffichotspot.
changesintheconstellationofactiveusersandcanthereforebe
usedinpractice.Moreover,wewillconsiderscenarioswherea
traffichotspotmovesaroundovertime.Apartfromthealgorithm
III. SCENARIOSANDPERFORMANCEMETRIC
we proposed in [22] the aforementioned solutions from the
We consider a macro-cellular network whose service provi-
literaturearenotdesignedforthesekindsofscenarios.
sioning is impacted by a disruptive event, resulting in a site
failure. As a consequence of this event, it may be the case
B. Contributions
that users are distressed which may lead to the emergence of
As mentioned earlier, it is challenging to find a good 3D- a traffic hotspot. In this setting, we will consider a total of
positionforadronebasestationasitdependsonmanyaspects 44 scenarios, characterized by two distinct inter-site distances
whichareoftenunknownordifficulttomeasure.Thereforewe (ISDs)of500mand3500m(correspondingtoanurbananda
proposeandassessadata-drivenalgorithmthataimstofindthe rural environment, respectively). For both the urban and rural
optimal3D-positioninscenarioswithanetworkdisruptionevent environment we consider a case without a traffic hotspot and
(site failure) where a traffic hotspot may emerge. Compared sevencaseswithdistincthotspotlocations(markedbythecyan
to [22], we consider a broader range of scenarios (different dots in Fig. 1). When a hotspot is present, we will consider
hotspot locations for both urban and rural environments), as three different relative traffic intensities in the hotspot. Hence
wellasscenarioswherethehotspotmovesovertime. the scenarios differ with respect to the type of environment
Asopposedto[4],[5],[6],[7],[8],[9],[10],[11],[12],[13], (dense urban (DU) or rural (RU)), the location of the hotspot
[14],[15],[16]whichoptimizethedronepositionforsnapshots definedbythedistancetothefailingsited (inm)andangle
hotspot
oftheenvironment(agivenconstellationoftheuserlocations), relativetothex-axisϕ (indegrees),andtherelativetraffic
hotspot
we propose an algorithm that optimizes the drone location intensityinthehotspotρ.Inordertoprovideclearreferencesto
in an online manner. This means that the proposed algorithm thevariousscenarioswhenpresentingthenumericalresults,we
--- PAGE 4 ---
PIJNAPPELetal.:ONLINEPOSITIONINGOFADRONE-MOUNTEDBASESTATIONINEMERGENCYSCENARIOS 5575
However,ifthereisahightrafficintensityinahotspotarea,then
itmaybebettertopositionthedroneclosetothishotspotarea
tomakesurethattheusersinthehotspotenjoyfavorableradio
conditions.
It is evident that the location of the hotspot is an important
factor for the optimal drone position, but it is not only the
distance between the hotspot and the failing site that matters.
Thepositionofthehotspotrelativetotheazimuthdirectionsof
the nearest still operational base stations is important as well,
as it affects the degree to which those base stations can serve
thehotspottraffic.Consequently,thisalsoaffectsthedegreeto
which the drone needs to move towards the hotspot and help
Fig. 1. Best-server areas after the site failure. The different colored areas out.Toillustratethis,considertwoscenarios:scenarioAwitha
indicatethecellscorrespondingtotheregularbasestations.Theyellowareas
hotspotlocatedsuchthatthecloseststilloperationalregularsite
mark coverage holes. The black arrows show the azimuth directions of the
stilloperationalregularsites,andthecyandotsmarkpossiblelocationsthat hasanantennaaiminginthedirectionofthehotspot(indicated
we consider for the center of the hotspot. (a) Urban environment. (b) Rural with the letter A in Fig. 1(a)), and scenario B with a hotspot
environment.
located equally far from the failing site but with the nearest
still operational regular cell aimed 60 degrees away from the
hotspot(indicatedwiththeletterBinFig.1(a)).ForscenarioA,
denote them in the format “{DU, RU}-d -ϕ -ρ”. For
hotspot hotspot theUEsinthehotspothavearelativelygoodconnectiontothe
example“DU-100-90-4”referstoascenariowithadenseurban
regularbasestationcomparedtothehotspotUEsinscenarioB.
environment, a traffic hotspot located 100 m from the failing
Therefore,inscenarioAthedronecanfocusmoreonUEsclose
siteatan angle of 90 degrees withrespect tothe x-axis where
to the failing site, and hence the optimal position of the drone
the traffic intensity is four times higher than elsewhere. While
willbeclosertothefailingsite.
it is infeasible to exhaustively evaluate all possible scenarios
(consideringallpossiblehotspotlocationsandtrafficintensities
B. AltitudeTrade-off
in the hotspot), the selected scenarios serve to cover a broad
rangeofrelevantenvironmentsandtrafficpatterns. Theselectionofthealtitudeinvolvesafewtrade-offsaswell.
Asmentionedearlier,weadopttheCallSuccessRate(CSR)as First, a higher altitude implies that the distance between the
performancemetrictoevaluatetheperformanceinthesescenar- drone and the UEs increases, which has a negative impact on
ios.TheCSRisdefinedasthefractionofcallsthataresuccessful, the path loss, and therefore on the signal strength. Secondly,
meaning that a call has coverage, is admitted to the system, is a higher altitude also has the advantage that there is a higher
notdropped,andreceivesitsrequiredminimumbitrateforits probabilityofhavingaline-of-sight(LoS)linkwithaUE,which
entireduration.TodeterminetheCSRweonlyconsidercallsthat inturnhasapositiveimpactonthepathlossandthereforeonthe
are initiated in the pre-incident best-server areas of the failing signalstrength.Lastly,anincreasedaltitudehasapositiveimpact
siteanditsimmediateneighborcells,indicatedbytheblueand on the antenna gain as the UEs will be closer to the antenna’s
yellow-shaded areas in Fig. 1, with the latter areas indicating main beam, which is directed downwards, which in turn has a
coverageholescausedbythesitefailure. positiveimpactonthesignalstrength.Overall,thenetresultof
thesecounteractingeffectsisnon-trivialandultimatelydepends
on the altitude of the drone and the 2D-distances between the
IV. KEYCHALLENGES
UEsandthedrone.
In this section we will elaborate on various challenges and Becauseachangeinaltitudeaffectsthesignalstrength,italso
trade-offsassociatedwithfindinganappropriatepositionfora changestheareawherethedroneprovidescoverage.Atthesame
drone-mountedbasestationwithrespecttotheCSR.Tooptimize time a change in altitude also affects the amount of resources
theCSR,weconsiderfourcontrolparametersofthedronethat thatusersrequire,whichmayleadtoatrade-offbetweenserving
can be adjusted, namely the x, y and z coordinates and the userswithagoodbitrateorprovidingcoveragetoalargerarea.
so-called Cell Individual Offset (CIO) which is used for cell
selection(steeringtraffictowardsorawayfromthedrone)with C. CIO-Trade-off
the intention to better balance the loads of the drone and its
As mentioned before, the CIO (given in dB throughout this
neighboringcells.
paper) is used as a cell selection bias with the goal to balance
theloads.Forthecellselection,welookatallcellsthatprovide
A. 2D-PositionTrade-off
coveragetotheUE,andfromthesecellsselectthecoveringcell
One trade-off with respect to the 2D-position (x and y co- withthehighestvalueofRSRP+CIO,whereRSRPdenotesthe
ordinates) of the drone arises when deciding whether to bring Reference Signal Received Power in dBm. Therefore the CIO
capacitytoahotspotareaortoprovidecoveragenearthefailing isusedtosteertraffictowards(positiveCIO)oraway(negative
site.Ifthereisnohotspot,orthehotspotisnottoointense,then CIO)fromthedronetobalancetheloadsbetweenthedroneand
itislikelybesttopositionthedronerightabovethefailingsite. theothercells.SothedifficultyinoptimizingtheCIOisfindinga
--- PAGE 5 ---
5576 IEEETRANSACTIONSONVEHICULARTECHNOLOGY,VOL.73,NO.4,APRIL2024
CIOvaluewhichreducestheloadofhighlyloadedcellswithout gainusingthefollowingformula
overloadingthedronecellitself. (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5)
ϕ 2
Moreoverweshouldnotethatthealtitudeofthedronehasa G(ϕ)=−min 12 , A max +G d , (3)
non-trivialimpactontheoptimalvalueoftheCIO.Thereason HPBWd
forthisisthatthealtitudehasanimpactonthesignalstrength withA maxthemaximumattenuationandG dthemaximumgain
experienced by the UEs. If the UEs have a good signal, they
(bothindB).Weassumethatthedronehasatotaltransmitpower
require fewer resources and therefore the drone can support ofPmax =0.5W.
d
moreUEs.However,asmentionedbefore,itisnotclearhowthe
altitude affects the signal strengths and therefore, it is unclear
B. PropagationCharacteristics
howthealtitudeaffectstheoptimalCIOvalue.
ForthelinkbetweenUEsandregularbasestationsweusethe
path loss models provided in [23, Tables 7.4.1 and 7.4.2]. We
V. MODELINGASSUMPTIONS
determinethepathlossastheweightedaverageofthepathloss
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed drone
for a line-of-sight (LoS) and a non-line-of-sight (NLoS) link,
positioning algorithm, we will conduct extensive simulation
withweightsgivenbytheprobabilityofhavingaLoSorNLoS
experiments.Inthissectionwegiveanoverviewofthemodeling
link.
assumptionsusedinthesesimulations.
Inviewofthehigheraltitudeanddifferentorientationofthe
drone, we use a different path loss model for links between
A. NetworkandAntennaAspects the UEs and the drone base station. For this model we need
threestatisticalparameterstoreflectdifferentkindsofscattering
To model the network, we consider a hexagonal layout of
twelvethree-sectorizedsitescomprising12×3=36cells.We environments[25]:
make a distinction between capacity-limited and coverage- α:Theratioofbuilt-uplandareatothetotallandarea.
limitedscenarios,whichwecharacterizebytheassumptionof β:Thenumberofbuildingspersquarekilometer.
anurbanandaruralenvironmentwithinter-sitedistances(ISDs) γ:Ascaleparameterdescribingthebuildings’heightsaccording
of500mand3500m,respectively.Weuseawraparoundfeature toaRayleighdistribution.
tomimicaninfinite-sizenetworkandavoidboundaryeffects.
EachoftheseregularcellsisassignedaB =5MHzcarrier Using these parameters we can determine two other envi-
inthe3.5GHzband,whereafractionκofthecarrierisrequired ronment parameters ξ and ψ according to [20]. Now we can
formulatethepathlossbetweenthedroneandaUEasthefree
for control signals. Furthermore, we assume that the drone is
space path loss plus an excessive path loss component η or
wirelessly backhauled on a frequency different from the fre- LoS
η whichdependsonthetypeoflink(LoSorNLoS).Inline
quency used to serve the UEs. Moreover, each regular cell is NLoS
with[20]thepathlossisgivenby
served by directional antennas located at an altitude of 25 m
(cid:3) (cid:4)
and35mfortheurbanandruraldeployments,respectively[23, 4πdf
default values in Table 7.4.1-1]. For the antenna gains of the L d =20log 10 c +p LoS η LoS +(1−p LoS )η NLoS , (4)
regular base stations we will use the model proposed in [24]
wherecdenotesthespeedoflight,f thecarrierfrequencyand
characterized by the horizontal and vertical half-power beam
widthsHPBWh,v (indegrees),themaximumgainG r (indBi),
dthe3D-distancebetweenthedroneandtheUE,and
the front back ratio FBR (in dB) and the side lobe level SLL 1
p =1−p = , (5)
(in dB). Given these, we can express the total antenna gain as LoS NLoS 1+ξexp(−ψ[arctan(h/r)−ξ])
G(ϕ,θ)=G h(ϕ)+G v(θ)where
with h and r the height difference and the horizontal distance
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5)
ϕ 2 betweentheUEandthedrone,respectively.
G h(ϕ)=−min 12 , FBRh +G r , (1) Besidesthepathloss,thepropagationlossofasignalisalso
HPBWh
affected by shadow fading. To incorporate this, we determine
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5)
spatially and site-to-site correlated shadow fading maps for
θ−θ 2
G v(θ)=max −12 etilt , SLLv , (2) each of the sites according to the model provided in [26]. For
HPBWv
thismodelweneedtospecifythreeparameters:thesite-to-site
with ϕ denoting the horizontal angle relative to the azimuth correlationω,thedecorrelationdistanced decorr andthestandard
direction, θ denoting the negative elevation angle relative to deviationoftheshadowfadingσ sh .
the horizontal plane and θ denoting the electrical downtilt. Lastly,weimposeaminimumcouplinglossof70and80dB
etilt
fortheurbanandruralenvironment,respectively[27].
Furthermore we assume that all regular base stations have a
totaltransmitpowerofPmax =20W.
r
C. TrafficCharacteristics
Fortheantennagainofthedronebasestationweassumethat
the drone is equipped with an antenna consisting of a single WeassumethattheUEsthatwanttoinitiateanewcallarrive
antenna element. We then use a rotated version of the model according to a spatially uniform Poisson process with rate λ.
providedin[23,Table7.3-1],adaptingtheverticalcomponent In addition, we assume the emergence of a traffic hotspot that
toensureacircularfootprint.Asaresultwemodeltheantenna is caused by a network disruption event. This hotspot area is
--- PAGE 6 ---
PIJNAPPELetal.:ONLINEPOSITIONINGOFADRONE-MOUNTEDBASESTATIONINEMERGENCYSCENARIOS 5577
assumedtobeacirclewithradiusof100m,wherethearrival TABLEII
rate of new calls is ρ times higher than elsewhere. The value SIMULATIONPARAMETERS
ofρandthelocationofthetraffichotspotwillbevariedinthe
differentsimulationscenarios.
AllactiveUEsareassumedtobestatic(notmovingovertime)
and the calls are assumed to have an exponentially distributed
durationwithameanofτ seconds.Furthermoreweassumethat
all calls require a minimum bit rate of R Mb/s for their entire
duration.
D. ResourceManagementAspects
Upon call generation, we first determine the RSRP values
to the different cells to check whether the associated UE has
coverageornot.WhentheUEhascoverage,itisassignedtothe
coveringcellwiththehighestvalueofRSRP+CIO.Thenthe
admissioncontrolmechanismestimatesthefractionofdownlink
resources that this new call requires such that it achieves its
minimumrequiredbitrateR.Therequiredfractionoftheserving
cell’sresourcesisestimatedbyR/((1−κ)Blog (1+SINR)),
2
where SINR denotes the current Signal-to-Interference-plus-
Noise Ratio experienced by the new UE, and B and κ are
recalled to denote the available bandwidth and the fraction
of this bandwidth required for control signals, respectively.
For the calculation of the SINR, we assume a thermal noise
of −106.94 dBm and a noise figure of 8 dB. The admission
E. SimulationParameters
controlmechanismadmitsthenewcallwhensufficientresources
To be able to use the described models, we need to select
can be made available without violating the minimum bit rate
suitable parameter values for our simulations. The selection is
requirementofon-goingcalls.
basedontheonesindicatedina3GPPtechnicalreport[23],a
In line with the aim to optimize the CSR, we assume a
commonlyknownreference[29],andanantennadatasheet[30].
scheduling mechanism that allocates the available resources
Anoverviewoftheselectedparametersforbothtypesofenvi-
in a proportional fair way subject to the minimum bit rate
ronmentsisshowninTableII.
requirement. In the unfortunate case where it is not possible
to provide all assigned UEs with their required minimum bit
rate(whichcanbeaconsequenceofthedronemovementasthis VI. SENSITIVITYANALYSIS
impactsthesignalstrengths),asmanyUEsaspossiblereceive
InSectionIVwegavesomeintuitionfortheoptimalvalues
the required amount of resources. In this case the remaining
of the control variables (x, y, z and CIO). Since it is not clear
resourcesaregiventotheunsatisfiedUEthatrequirestheleast
how and to what extent these control parameters affect the
amountofresources.
CSRperformance,weconductedasimulation-basedsensitivity
Although we do not consider user mobility, the dynamic
analysisinvolvingastaticdrone.Inthissensitivityanalysiswe
adjustmentsofthedronepositionleadtochangesinthepathloss
considereachofthe44scenariosintroducedinSectionIII.For
andantennagainvalues.Asaconsequence,thetotalamountof
each scenario we consider 21 different drone positions in the
requiredresourcesmayexceedtheavailablecapacity,inwhich
horizontalplane(specifiedrelativetothelocationsofthehotspot
case at least one UE no longer receives its minimum required andfailingsite),altitudesin{80,90,...,200}mandCIOvalues
bitrate.AnotherconsequenceisthattheRSRPvalueschangeas in{−4,−3,...,3,4}dBforthedrone.Foreachcombinationof
wellandmayresultinthedroppingofUEs.Thishappenswhen
these parameters we determine the CSR averaged over twenty
theRSRPoftheservingcellfallsbelowthecoveragethreshold
simulationrunswithdistinctrandomseeds,eachcoveringatime
of −120 dBm. Moreover, these changes in RSRP values can
spanofonehour.
leadtohandoverrequestswhentheRSRP+CIOofacandidate
targetcellexceedstheRSRP+CIOofthecurrentlyservingcell
A. 2D-Position
byatleast3dB(assumedhysteresisvalue)foratleast200ms
(assumed time to trigger). When such a handover request is AsmentionedinSectionIV-A,thelocationandintensityofthe
submitted to the target cell, the admission control treats this hotspotimpacttheoptimalsettingsofthecontrolparameters.To
request in the same way as it treats a new UE. Whenever a illustratetheimpactofthehotspotintensity,consideranurban
handoverrequestisdenied,itisrepeatedafter50msprovided environment where the center of the hotspot is indicated with
thattheconditionstriggeringthehandoverarestillsatisfied. theletterAinFig.1(a).Fig.2(a)and(b)showtheresultsofa
--- PAGE 7 ---
5578 IEEETRANSACTIONSONVEHICULARTECHNOLOGY,VOL.73,NO.4,APRIL2024
Fig.2. CSRforlow(a)andhigh(b)trafficintensitiesinthehotspot,forvariouscombinationsofCIOvaluesandpositionsofthedroneonthelinebetweenthe
failingsiteandthecenterofthehotspot.(a)Lowtrafficintensityinthehotspot.(b)Hightrafficintensityinthehotspot.
Fig.3. CSRfortwodifferenthotspotlocations(AandB)withequaltrafficintensity,forvariouscombinationsofCIOvaluesandpositionsofthedroneonthe
linebetweenthefailingsiteandthecenterofthehotspot.(a)ScenarioA,hotspotlocatedintheazimuthdirectionofanearbycell.(b)ScenarioB,hotspotlocated
at60degreesfromtheazimuthdirectionofanearbycell.
sensitivity analysis assessing the impact of the drone position vary the CIO value and fix the altitude of the drone at 120 m.
and the CIO on the CSR for a scenario with a low and a high In line with the argumentation provided in Section IV-A, the
trafficintensityinthehotspot,respectively.Inthesefigures,the figuresshowthattheoptimalpositionofthedroneiscloserto
positionsofthedronearealongthelinefromthefailingsite(2D- thefailingsiteinscenarioAthaninscenarioB.
distance0m)tothecenterofthehotspot(2D-distance200m)
forafixedaltitudeof120m.Thefiguresindeedshowthatthe
B. Altitude
optimalposition(withrespecttotheCSR)ofthedroneisclose
tothefailingsiteforalow-intensityhotspot,whileitiscloseto Let us first consider the RSRP values for UEs located at
thecenterofthehotspotwhenthetrafficintensityinthehotspot various distances from the drone for different altitudes of the
ishigh.Moreover,weseethattheoptimalvalueoftheCIOis droneasplottedinFig.4.Inthisfigurethecolorsindicatethe
differentforthetwoscenarios,whichwewillfurtherdiscussin signalstrength,andthewhitecoloredareaindicatesUElocations
SectionIV-C. withoutcoverage.Weseethatthecoverageareaincreaseswith
In Section IV-A we also mentioned that optimal settings of the altitude. Apparently, for most UE locations the positive
the control parameters depends on the location of the hotspot effects of increasing the altitude on the antenna gain and LoS
relativetotheazimuthdirectionsoftheneareststilloperational probability for the path loss outweigh the negative impact on
basestations.Toqualitativelyillustratethis,weplotinFig.3(a) thepathlosscausedbytheincreaseddistancebetweentheUE
and(b)theCSRfordifferentlocationsofthedroneforscenarios and the drone. However, we note that in practice some legal
A and B (as defined in Section IV-A), respectively. Again, we restrictions may be in place for the altitude at which a drone
--- PAGE 8 ---
PIJNAPPELetal.:ONLINEPOSITIONINGOFADRONE-MOUNTEDBASESTATIONINEMERGENCYSCENARIOS 5579
Fig.4. RSRPvaluesforvariousaltitudesand2D-distancesinanurban(a)andrural(b)environment,respectively.(a)Urbanenvironment.(b)Ruralenvironment.
is allowed to fly. In this study we will restrict the drone to to steer some of this traffic towards regular cells that still can
fly at an altitude up to 120 m which is the maximum allowed supporttheseUEs.ThisillustratesthattheCIOhasanon-trivial
altitudefordronesinthe‘open’category[28],meaningthatno impactonblockingandhencealsoontheCSR.However,inour
specialpermitisrequired.However,itmightbepossibletoavoid simulation study we found that in 38 out of 44 scenarios the
thisrestrictionandpotentiallyachievebetterperformancewhen CIO optimizing the CSR lies in the interval from −2 to 2 dB.
consideringdronesinthe‘specific’or‘certified’category. Moreover, the scenarios where this is not the case correspond
AswecanseeinFig.4,increasingthealtitudeofthedrone to an ISD of 500 m (urban environment) and an eight times
deteriorates the RSRP for UEs close to the main beam of the higher traffic intensity in the hotspot than elsewhere. We also
drone (2D-distance 0 m). This is caused by the fact that the seehoweverthattheCSRseemsnottoosensitivewithrespect
pathlossdeterioratesmorethantheantennagainimproves.On totheCIO,thereforeitappearstobepossibletofixtheCIOand
theotherhand,wealsoseethatforUEsfurtherawayfromthe stillattainaclose-to-optimalCSR.
drone an increased drone altitude enhances the RSRP, as for
these UEs the positive effects of the increased altitude on the D. SelectionoftheAltitudeandCIO
pathloss(duetoanincreasedLoSprobability)andantennagain
AsmentionedinSectionsVI-BandVI-C,theoptimalaltitude
outweigh the negative effect of the increased distance on the
andCIOwereinmostcases120morhigherandbetween−2and
path loss. Although from a coverage perspective it is best to
2dB,respectively.Motivatedbythisobservation,weinvestigate
position the drone at an altitude of 120 m given the assumed
whetherthesacrificeintermsofareducedCSRisacceptablein
legalrestriction,itisnotclearwhetherthisisalsoagoodchoice
casewechoosetosimplifytheoptimizationchallengebyfixing
fromaCSRpointofview,whereweshouldkeepinmindthat
thealtitudeto120mandtheCIOto0dB.Thecorresponding
thestilloperationalregularbasestationsalsoprovidecoverage
simulation results, shown in Fig. 5, reveal that the pairwise
to the area previously covered by the failing site. However, in
difference between the CSR values is small, with an average
37outof44scenariosinoursimulationstudy,weobservedthat
difference of approximately 0.004 and a maximum difference
theoptimalaltitudefromaCSRviewpointwas120morhigher.
less than 0.012. Based on this insight, we choose to fix the
In Section VI-D we will further investigate the impact of the
altitude and the CIO to the given settings in the remainder of
altitudeontheCSR.
thispaper,andconcentrateonthedynamicoptimizationofthe
drone’s2D-position.
C. CellIndividualOffset
ToillustratetheimpactoftheCIOweconsidertwoscenarios VII. ALGORITHMS
wherethehotspotislocatedatthesameposition(200mfrom
In this section we specify the proposed data-driven drone
the failing site),but has a different traffic intensity (ρ=2 and
positioning algorithm. For this we will elaborate on the al-
ρ=8).InFig.2(a)and(b)weplottheCSRforvariouslocations
gorithmic challenges, and describe the general framework of
of the drone on the line from the failing site to the center of
theproposeddata-drivendronepositioningalgorithmandused
the hotspot but at a fixed altitude of 120 m, and for various
controlmetrics(measurementdata).
values of the CIO. In these figures we observe that the CIO
valueoptimizingtheCSRislowerwhenthetrafficintensityin
A. AlgorithmicChallenges
the hotspot is higher. A reason for this is that when the traffic
intensity increases, the drone will at some point no longer be Although we reduce the complexity from four optimization
able to support all UEs in its close proximity, and thus needs variables to only two by fixing the altitude and the CIO (as
--- PAGE 9 ---
5580 IEEETRANSACTIONSONVEHICULARTECHNOLOGY,VOL.73,NO.4,APRIL2024
Fig.5. ComparisonofoptimalCSRvaluesfordifferentscenarios,whenthealtitudeandCIOareoptimized,orfixedat120mand0dB,respectively.(a)Urban
environment.(b)Ruralenvironment.
mentioned in Section VI-D), finding the optimal horizontal
B. GeneralFramework
dronepositionstillconstitutesasignificantchallenge.Moreover,
because the optimal position of the drone depends on many Weconsiderameasurement-basedalgorithmthatadjuststhe
unknown factors like the location and intensity of the hotspot, locationofthedrone(xandycoordinates)inaniterativemanner,
weneedanonlinealgorithmthatcanfindaneffectiveposition where only one coordinate is adjusted at a time. For these
forthedronewithclose-to-optimalCSR,inafairlyshortamount adjustmentswestartbymeasuringaCMthatcanbemeasured
oftime(orderofminutes). accuratelyinarelativelyshortamountoftime(whichweassume
Since we use the CSR as the main performance measure, it to be 200 ms). The measurement is followed by a ‘decision
seems natural to use this metric also to drive the adjustments point’,atwhichthealgorithmtakestheactiontomoveonemeter
of the drone position. However, the CSR cannot be measured inthexorydirectionwithanassumedspeedof24km/h.When
accuratelyinshortperiodsoftimeforseveralreasons.Firstof thedronehasmovedtothenewposition,wewaitsometime,the
all, the drone and other cells are unaware of UEs that do not so-called‘timetotrigger’whichisassumedtobe200mstoallow
have coverage. Secondly, a large number of calls needs to be handoverstooccurasapossibleconsequenceoftheaction.After
consideredtohaveanaccuratemeasurementoftheCSR.Hence, thatanewmeasurementperiodstartsfollowedbyanewdecision
theCSRisill-suitedtodrivetheonlineadjustmentsofthedrone point.Atthisdecisionpointthealgorithmneedstoselectthenext
position.Thus,weneedanotherso-calledcontrolmetric(CM) actionbasedonthepreviousactionsandthecurrentandprevious
todrivethealgorithm,whoseoptimizationideallyleadstothe CM.IftheCMhasimproved,thenitisassumedthattheprevious
same drone location that optimizes the CSR itself. Therefore actionwasagoodoneandthesameactionisrepeateduntilthe
themainnovelcomponentofthealgorithmthatweproposeisthe CM starts to degrade. In case the CM degraded, the previous
constructionofthisCM,whichshouldbeaccuratelymeasurable action is assumed to be a bad one, and the algorithm starts
in relatively short amounts of time. In Section VII-C we will adjustingthegivencoordinate(xory)intheoppositedirection
proposeseveralchoicesfortheCMwhichwillbeevaluatedin untiltheCMdegradesagain.Atthatpoint,westartoptimizing
SectionVIII-A,whereeachCMisusedincombinationwiththe the other coordinate. An overview of the algorithm is shown
generalalgorithmicframeworkpresentedinthenextsection. inFig.6.Althoughthe‘flowchartlogic’ofthealgorithmitself
--- PAGE 10 ---
PIJNAPPELetal.:ONLINEPOSITIONINGOFADRONE-MOUNTEDBASESTATIONINEMERGENCYSCENARIOS 5581
for the CMs. The idea behind this is that minimizing the cell
load or, alternatively, the load per UE leads to more available
resources,henceareductionofthenumberofblockedUEsand
thereforeanimprovementoftheCSR.
Akeyquestionisforwhichcellweconsiderthecellloador
loadperUE.Anobviouschoiceseemstobetoconsiderthedrone
cell,butitcouldalsobebeneficialtoreducetheload(perUE)
inthemosthighlyloadedregularcelladjacenttothecellsofthe
failingsite.Basedonthis,wechoosetoconsiderthefollowing
CMs:
CM1: Theloadofthedronecell.
CM2: Theloadofthemosthighlyloadedregularcell.
CM3: The load of the drone cell plus the load of the most
highlyloadedregularcell.
CM4: TheaverageloadperUEofthedronecell.
CM5: The average load per UE of the most highly loaded
regularcell.
CM6: TheaverageloadperUEofthedronecellandthemost
highlyloadedregularcell(eachcellhasequalweight).
CM7: TheaverageloadperUEofthedronecellandthemost
highly loaded regular cell (each cell has weight equal
tothenumberofassignedUEs).
In the description above, a regular cell is considered to be
one of the cells adjacent to the cells of the failing site. In
an operational network, the values of these CMs are readily
collectedbyacontrolnode,whichcanthendeterminethenext
Fig.6. Flowchartofthealgorithm.
actionandsignalthistothedrone.
isfairlystraightforward,theinnovativeaspectofthealgorithm VIII. SIMULATIONRESULTS
liesintheuseofacarefullydefinedCMtodrivetheadjustments
Using the models described in Section V, we evaluate the
of the drone with the goal to optimize the CSR. Note that it
performance of our algorithm with the CMs described in
is unclear what CM would best achieve this goal as the CSR
Section VII. In particular, the resulting CSR values will be
cannotbeusedtodrivethedroneadjustments.Furthermore,as
consideredforthe44scenarioswithastatichotspotasdescribed
theconstellationofcallschangesovertime,theoptimalposition
inSectionIII.Moreover,weconsidertheconvergencetimeofthe
ofthedronechangesovertimeaswell.Hence,anactionthatis
proposedalgorithmusingthebestperformingCM,andevaluate
consideredgoodattimetmaybeconsideredbadattimet+Δt,
thetrackingcapabilitiesofthedroneincaseofamovinghotspot.
whichimpliesthatthedroneneedstocontinuouslyoptimizeits
positionbasedontheCM.
A. StaticHotspots
Wewouldliketoemphasizethatthedescribedalgorithmonly
Let us first consider the performance of the proposed algo-
relies on practically measurable metrics and does not require
rithmwitheachofthechosenCMs,forthescenarioswithstatic
any pre-deployment learning or knowledge of the propagation
hotspotsdescribedinSectionIII.Besidesthescenariowithout
environment,antennafeatures,locationofthehotspotortraffic
ahotspot,weassumethemultiplicationfactorfortheintensity
density.Asaresult,thealgorithmcanbeusedinawiderange
of initiated calls in the hotspot ρ to be 2, 4 or 8 for the urban
ofscenarios.
environment,and10,25and50fortheruralenvironment.Inall
scenarios,thestartingpositionofthedroneisabovethefailing
C. ControlMetrics
site and that the location of the center of the hotspot is static
Asmentioned,theCMisatthecoreofthealgorithmandhasa (does not change). To get accurate results, we determine the
significantimpactontheperformanceofthealgorithmandthus average CSR over 25 simulation runs where for each run the
theCSR.Hence,itisimportanttoselectasuitableCM,which CSRismeasuredoveratimeperiodoffourhoursstartingwhen
canbeeasilyobtainedinpractice.Anexampleofametricthatis thedronehasbeenactiveforsometime.
easytomeasureinpracticerelatestotheloadofacell,whichwe TableIIIshowstheperformanceofthethreebenchmarks(no
definetobethefractionofresourcesthatacellneedstoprovide drone, a static drone above the failing site and the algorithm
allitsassignedUEstheirminimumrequiredbitrate.Theseload from[22])andtheproposedalgorithmusingthedifferentCMsas
measurementsindirectlyprovideanindicationforthedegreeof listedinSectionVII-C.Asexpected,thesettingwithoutadrone
blocking and thus the CSR, and therefore formanatural basis has the worst CSR performance for most scenarios. However,
--- PAGE 11 ---
5582 IEEETRANSACTIONSONVEHICULARTECHNOLOGY,VOL.73,NO.4,APRIL2024
TABLEIII urbansettingandρ=10intheruralsetting),butalsowhenthe
CSROFTHEBENCHMARKSANDPROPOSEDALGORITHMWITH
centerofthehotspotisrelativelyclosetothefailingsite.
DIFFERENTCMS
Although the algorithm in [22] can make adjustments with
respecttothealtitude(butalsohasamaximumaltitudeof120m)
and CIO, the proposed algorithm shows similar performance
withCM1and4.However,theproposedalgorithmhasinmost
scenarios a higher CSR with CM 3, 6 and 7 which is thanks
tothefactthattheseconsiderboththedronecellandthemost
highlyloadedregularcell.Asitdependsonthescenariowhich
ofthethreeCMsperformsbest,wewillselecttheCMwiththe
bestCSRoverallscenarios,whichturnsouttobeCM7.
Asmentionedearlier,theperformanceimprovementthatcan
berealizedbythedeploymentofadronebasestationdepends
on the scenario. The proposed algorithm using CM 7 has at
leastasimilarperformancetothedeploymentofadroneabove
the failing site, but in some scenarios the proposed algorithm
provides a significant performance improvement over such a
static deployment. Examples of these scenarios are scenarios
DU-100-120-4, DU-100-120-8, DU-200-90-4, DU-200-90-8,
DU-200-120-4 and DU-200-120-8. In these cases we see im-
provements in CSR of more than 0.025, 0.035, 0.018, 0.030,
0.031and0.055,respectively.Althoughthesevaluesmayseem
toindicaterathermodestimprovements,theyimplyareduction
in the fraction of failed calls with more than 18%, 17%, 11%,
12%, 18% and 21%, respectively. This means for example for
scenarioDU-200-120-8thatmorethanoneoutoffivecallsthat
would be unsuccessful when deploying a static drone at the
failing site would be successful when the drone would adjust
its position using the proposed algorithm. Hence in several
scenarios, the algorithm is able to dynamically find a better
position for the drone which significantly reduces the fraction
offailedcalls.
InFig.7wecomparetheproposedalgorithmusingCM7with
thethreebenchmarksettings(nodrone,astaticdroneabovethe
failingsiteandadronethatadjustsitsx,y,zandCIOusingthe
algorithmproposedin[22]).Forthesesettingstheaveragewidth
ofthetwo-sided95%confidenceintervalsislessthan0.004,i.e.
around 0.45% of the indicated value. Hence we see that the
proposed algorithm significantly outperforms all benchmarks
inscenariosconsideringadenseurbanenvironmentwherethe
hotspotisnotlocatedatthefailingsiteandhasaloadthatisfour
oreighttimeshigherthanelsewhere.Forallotherscenarios,the
proposed algorithm and the best-performing benchmark have
overlapping confidence intervals, which indicates that in these
CM2and5haveapoorperformance,whichiscausedbythefact scenariostheproposedalgorithmhasaperformancesimilarto
thatthedronetendstomoveinthewrongdirection.Toexplain thebest-performingbenchmark.
this,noticethatonlytheloadorloadperUEofthemosthighly
loaded regular cell is considered. Moving the drone towards
B. ConvergenceTime
this cell implies additional interference for the UEs connected
to this regular cell, which then need a larger fraction of the Inanemergencyscenarioitisofutmostimportancethatthe
availableresources.HencetheCM(loadorloadperUE)inthis droneisabletofindagoodpositioninafairlyshortamountof
cellincreaseswhilewearetryingtominimizetheCM,meaning time.Inordertoinvestigatetheconvergencetime(thetimethat
thatitisbetterforthedronetomoveawayfromthiscell. thedroneneedstofindagoodposition),weplottheaverageCSR
We see that the static drone above the failing site performs of25simulationrunsmeasuredoveramovingtimewindowof5
quitewellinanumberofscenarios.Thescenarioswherethisis minutesovertime.Fortheurbanenvironmentwewillconsider
the case have in common that there is no hotspot or a hotspot thescenarioswherethehotspotislocatedatpositionsAandB
with a relatively low intensity of initiated calls (ρ=2 in the inFig.1(a),aswellasahotspotwithitscenteratthefailedsite.
--- PAGE 12 ---
PIJNAPPELetal.:ONLINEPOSITIONINGOFADRONE-MOUNTEDBASESTATIONINEMERGENCYSCENARIOS 5583
Fig.7. ComparisonofCSRcorrespondingtotheproposedalgorithmusingCM7withthethreebenchmarks.(a)Urbanenvironment.(b)Ruralenvironment.
Forthesehotspotlocationswewillconsiderthetrafficintensity these scenarios a good position for the drone is close to the
in the hotspot to be twice or eight times as high as elsewhere failingsite(wherethedronestartsattime0).However,forthe
i.e. ρ∈{2,8}. Similarly, in the rural setting we will consider scenarios where the hotspot is located at location A or B with
thelocationsCandDinFig.1(b)aswellasthelocationofthe ρ=8,weseethatittakesapproximately1400secondstoreach
failingsiteasthecenterofthehotspot,butnowwewillconsider anequilibrium.Furthermore,weseeinFig.8(a)thatthesettings
thetrafficintensityinthehotspottobe10or50timesashighas withρ=8havelowerCSRcomparedtothesettingswithρ=2.
elsewherei.e.ρ∈{10,50}. Toexplainthis,wenotethattheurbanenvironmentwithanISD
Before we discuss Fig. 8, we notice that the CSR value at of500mcorrespondstoacapacity-limitedscenario.Hencefor
timetismeasuredoverthetimewindowfromtimet−300tot. higher values of ρ, there is more traffic that cannot be served,
Furthermore,time0indicatesthepointintimewherethedrone resultinginalowerCSR.
becomes active.Therefore,itislogicalthattheCSRincreases When we consider the rural environment, Fig. 8(b) shows
shortlyafterthis,asthedroneisthenabletoadmitallnewusers thatforallscenariostheCSRfluctuatesaroundanequilibrium
andisgraduallyusingmoreofitscapacity. valueafter5minutes.Theexplanationforthisisthattherural
For the scenario with the hotspot at the failing site and for environment corresponds to a coverage-limited setting. This
thescenarioswiththehotspotatlocationsAandBwithρ=2, means that a failing site results in areas without coverage, but
Fig.8(a)showsthattheCSRisfluctuatingaroundanequilibrium alsothatUEsinareasaroundthesecoverageholeshaveabad
after only 5 minutes. This can be explained by the fact that in signalstrength,andthuswhenadmittedrequirelargeamounts
--- PAGE 13 ---
5584 IEEETRANSACTIONSONVEHICULARTECHNOLOGY,VOL.73,NO.4,APRIL2024
Fig.8. CSRovertimemeasuredover5-minutetimewindows.(a)Urbanenvironment.(b)Ruralenvironment.
of the available resources. As we see in Fig. 1(b), these areas
without coverage, and thus also areas where UEs need a large
fraction of resources, are more prominent close to the failing
site.Therefore,adronepositionedabovethefailingsitealready
improvestheCSRsignificantly,andturnsouttoleavelittleroom
forfurtherimprovements.
AlthoughthepresentedresultsareforCM7,theotherCMs
except 2 and 5 (which had bad performance as indicated in
TableIII)showsimilarbehavior.
C. MovingHotspots
Fig.9. Illustrationofthedifferentmovementpatterns(cyan,greenandblue)
So far we have only considered static hotspots. However in ofthehotspot,inrelationtothefailingsiteandstilloperationalsites.
anemergencysituationhotspotsmaymove,forexamplewhena
crowdtriestogetawayfromtheimpactedarea.Inthesekindsof
situations,itisimportantforouralgorithmtokeepadjustingthe
dronepositiontoserveasmanyUEsaspossible.Aswehaveseen abovethefailingsiteandweseethatthedroneisabletofindand
in Section VIII-B, the position of the drone is most important follow the movement of the hotspot. However, we also notice
intheurbansetting,whenthereisahightrafficintensityinthe thatthedronealwaysslightlylagsbehindthehotspot,whichis
hotspot. Therefore, we will focus on the urban environment, becausethedronehastofollowthehotspotanddoesinnoway
wherewehaveahotspotmovingi)counterclockwiseinacircle predict the path of the hotspot. Furthermore, Figs. 11 and 12
aroundthefailingsite,ii)backandforthinastraightlinethrough show that the y-coordinate does not follow the hotspot to the
the failing site at two different angles relative to the azimuth pointfurthestawayfromthefailingsite.Thiscanbeexplained
directions of the failing site, where at the end of the line the bythefactthatevenforahotspotwithahightrafficintensity,it
hotspot stops for a short period before it starts moving in the maybebettertomoveintothedirectionofthehotspot,butnot
opposite direction. These movement patterns are illustrated in rightaboveit,aswehavealsoseeninFig.2(b).
Fig. 9. For the hotspot we assumed a speed of 1 km/h. Note Furthermore,weobserveinFigs.10–12thatthedronefollows
that these movement patterns are not necessarily realistic, but slightly different trajectories for the various simulation runs,
servetotesttheresponsivenessandtrackingcapabilitiesofthe which is caused by the different user dynamics in each of
algorithm. the simulation runs. Moreover, as in all simulation runs (of
To illustrate that the drone is able to follow the hotspot, the same scenario) the drone follows a similar trajectory, we
Figs. 10–12 plot the distance to the failing site along the x concludethattheproposedalgorithmisabletoadapttochanging
andy-axisforthethreemovementpatternswhenρ=8forfive environments.
simulation runs. We expect that the drone follows the hotspot Similarly to the analysis of the convergence time, the pre-
closely as it has a high traffic intensity, meaning that the CSR sentedresultsareforCM7,withtheotherCMsexcept2and5
benefitswhenthedroneservestheusersinthehotspot.Inthese (whichhadbadperformanceasindicatedinTableIII)showing
figures,time0indicatesthemomentthatthedroneisactivated similarbehavior.
--- PAGE 14 ---
PIJNAPPELetal.:ONLINEPOSITIONINGOFADRONE-MOUNTEDBASESTATIONINEMERGENCYSCENARIOS 5585
Fig.10. Circularmovementofhotspot(cyancircleinFig.9).(a)Distancetofailingsitealongx-axis.(b)Distancetofailingsitealongy-axis.
Fig.11. Linemovementofhotspotoffazimuthdirection(bluelineinFig.9).(a)Distancetofailingsitealongx-axis.(b)Distancetofailingsitealongy-axis.
Fig.12. Linemovementofhotspotalongazimuthdirection(greenlineinFig.9).(a)Distancetofailingsitealongx-axis.(b)Distancetofailingsitealongy-axis.
--- PAGE 15 ---
5586 IEEETRANSACTIONSONVEHICULARTECHNOLOGY,VOL.73,NO.4,APRIL2024
IX. CONCLUSION [11] R.dePaulaParisotto,P.V.Klaine,J.P.B.Nadas,R.D.Souza,G.Brante,
andM.A.Imran,“Dronebasestationpositioningandpowerallocation
Inthispaperwehaveproposedandevaluatedadata-drivenal- using reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Symp. Wireless
gorithmforsteeringadronebasestationinordertooptimizethe Commun.Syst.,2019pp.213–217.
[12] P.V.Klaine,J.P.B.Nadas,R.D.Souza,andM.A.Imran,“Distributed
CSRinascenariowithafailingsiteandemergenceofahotspot.
drone base station positioning for emergency cellular networks using
Toadjustthedroneposition,ouralgorithmleveragesreal-time reinforcementlearning,”Cogn.Comput.,vol.10,pp.790–804,2018.
measurabledatainanonlinemanner,anddoesnotrequirepre- [13] D. Prado, S. Inca, D. Martín-Sacristán, and J. F. Monserrat, “Com-
parison of optimization methods for aerial base station placement
deploymenttrainingorknowledgeofthepropagationenviron-
with users mobility,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf. Netw. Commun., 2019,
ment,antennafeatures,locationofthehotspotortrafficdensity. pp.485–489.
OuralgorithmsignificantlyimprovestheCSRcomparedtoa [14] H.Ahmadi,K.Katzis,andM.Z.Shakir,“Anovelairborneself-organising
architecturefor5Gnetworks,”inProc.IEEE86thVeh.Technol.Conf.,
settingwithoutadrone,butalsowhencomparedtothealgorithm
2017,pp.1–5.
of [22] even though our algorithm only adjusts the x and y- [15] S.ZhangandN.Ansari,“3Ddronebasestationplacementandresource
coordinatesandnotthealtitudeoracellselectionbiasasthese allocationwithFSO-basedbackhaulinhotspots,”IEEETrans.Veh.Tech-
nol.,vol.69,no.3,pp.3322–3329,Mar.2020.
turned out to have a small impact. Moreover, our algorithm is
[16] D. Wu, X. Sun, and N. Ansari, “An FSO-based drone assisted mobile
abletofindanear-optimalpositionwithinafairlyshortamount accessnetworkforemergencycommunications,”IEEETrans.Netw.Sci.
oftime.Inadditionwedemonstratedthatouralgorithmhasthe Eng.,vol.7,no.3,pp.1597–1606,Jul.–Sep.2020.
[17] E. T. Michailidis, N. Nomikos, P. S. Bithas, D. Vouyioukas, and A.
abilitytotracktheoptimalpositionincaseofamovinghotspot.
G.Kanatas,“Optimal3-Daerialrelayplacementformulti-userMIMO
Infutureresearchitwouldbeinterestingtoinvestigatesettings communications,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 55, no. 6,
withabroaderrangeoftraffictypes,wherethegenericchoice pp.3218–3229,Dec.2019.
[18] M. A. Kishk, A. Bader, and M.-S. Alouini, “On the 3-D placement
ofthecontrolmetricmightprovebeneficial.Furthertopicslike
ofairbornebasestationsusingtetheredUAVs,”IEEETrans.Commun.,
deploymentalgorithmsformultipledronesinthisscenarioorthe vol.68,no.8,pp.5202–5215,Aug.2020.
use of cell outage compensation would be interesting subjects [19] T.R.Pijnappel,J.L.vandenBerg,S.C.Borst,andR.Litjens,“Drone-
assistedcellularnetworks:Optimalpositioningandloadmanagement,”in
forfutureresearchaswell.
Proc.IEEE93rdVeh.Technol.Conf.,2021,pp.1–6.
[20] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and S. Lardner, “Optimal LAP altitude
REFERENCES for maximum coverage,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 6,
pp.569–572,Dec.2014.
[1] 5G!Drones,EUH2020project,2019–2022,www.5gdrones.eu [21] C. Boucetta, A. Dridi, H. Moungla, H. Afifi, and A. E. Kamal,
[2] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, Y.-H. Nam, and M. Debbah, “A “Optimizing drone deployment for cellular communication coverage
tutorial on UAVs for wireless networks: Applications, challenges, and during crowded event,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf., 2019,
openproblems,”IEEECommun.Surv.Tut.,vol.21,no.3,pp.2334–2360, pp.622–627.
Thirdquarter2019. [22] T. R. Pijnappel, J. L. van den Berg, S. C. Borst, and R. Litjens,
[3] M. Mozaffari, A. Taleb Zadeh Kasgari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. “Data-drivenoptimizationofdrone-assistedcellularnetworks,”inProc.
Debbah,“Beyond5GwithUAVs:Foundationsofa3Dwirelesscellular IEEE17thInt.Conf.WirelessMobileComput.,Netw.Commun.,2021,
network,”IEEETrans.WirelessCommun.,vol.18,no.1,pp.357–372, pp.233–240.
Jan.2019. [23] 3rdGenerationPartnershipProject,“Studyonchannelmodelforfrequen-
[4] T.Akram,M.Awais,R.Naqvi,A.Ahmed,andM.Naeem,“Multicriteria ciesfrom0.5to100GHz,”3GPP,SophiaAntipolis,France,Tech.Rep.
UAVbasestations placementfordisastermanagement,” IEEESyst. J., 38.901v16.1.0,2019.
vol.14,no.3,pp.3475–3482,Sep.2020. [24] F. Gunnarsson et al., “Downtilted base station antennas - a simulation
[5] F.Al-Turjman,J.P.Lemayian,S.Alturjman,andL.Mostarda,“Enhanced model proposal and impact on HSPA and LTE performance,” in Proc.
deployment strategy for the 5G drone-BS using artificial intelligence,” IEEE68thVeh.Technol.Conf.-Fall,2008,pp.1–5.
IEEEAccess,vol.7,pp.5999–76008,2019. [25] “Propagation data and prediction methods for the design of terrestrial
[6] E.Kalantari,H.Yanikomeroglu,andA.Yongacoglu,“Onthenumberand broadbandmillimetricradioaccesssystemsoperatinginafrequencyrange
3D placement of drone base stations in wireless cellular networks,” in ofabout20–50GHz,”Rec.P1410-2,InternationalTelecommunications
Proc.IEEE84thVeh.Technol.Conf.,2016,pp.1–6. Union,Geneva,Switzerland,2003.
[7] W. Shi et al., “Multiple drone-cell deployment analyses and optimiza- [26] R. Fraile, J. F. Monserrat, J. Gozálvez, and N. Cardona, “Mo-
tion in drone assisted radio access networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, bile radio bi-dimensional large-scale fading modelling with site-to-
pp.12518–12529,2018. site cross-correlation,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 19, pp.101–106,
[8] F. Pasandideh, T. D. e Silva, A. A. S. da Silva, and E. P. de Freitas, 2008.
“Topology management for flying ad hoc networks based on particle [27] 3rdGenerationPartnershipProject,“LTE;Evolveduniversalterrestrial
swarm optimization and software-defined networking,” Wireless Netw., radioaccess(E-UTRA);radiofrequency(RF)systemscenario,”3GPP,
vol.28,pp.1–16,2022. SophiaAntipolis,France,Tech.Rep.36.942,v16.0.0,2020.
[9] X. Li, “Deployment ofdronebase stations forcellular communication [28] The European Commission, Official journal of the European Union,
withoutaprioriuserdistributioninformation,”inProc.IEEE37thChin. “L152,”vol.62,Jun.11,2019.[Online].Available:https://eur-lex.europa.
ControlConf.,2018,pp.7274–7281. eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:L:2019:152:FULL
[10] R. Ghanavi, E. Kalantari, M. Sabbaghian, H. Yanikomeroglu, and A. [29] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and A. Jamalipour, “Modeling air-to-
Yongacoglu,“Efficient3Daerialbasestationplacementconsideringusers groundpathloss forlowaltitude platforms inurbanenvironments,”in
mobilitybyreinforcementlearning,”inProc.IEEEWireless.Commun. Proc.IEEEGlob.Commun.Conf.,2014,pp.2898–2904.
Netw.Conf.,2018,pp.1–6. [30] Ericsson,“Ericssonantennasystemcatalog2021,”2021,pp.487–494.
